# 2024-Senior-Project-Sathvik-Nookala
Morality as a subject has implications to a lot of other subjects and can be used to explain real world phenomena. The theory of Moral Foundations (MFT), which divides morality into five pillars: care, fairness, loyalty, sanctity, and authority, allows us to explain the rhetoric of any speaker through morality.

Connecting morality to the realm of politics allows social scientists to explore and explain how political officials think. In an election year, I thought it would be insightful to look into presidential rhetoric, especially presidential candidate debates. In the past few election cycles, the popularity of presidential debates has grown exponentially. Especially in the age of mass media, the importance of these debates has also grown significantly with viewers' ideals being subject to change based on how candidates talk about themes and ideas brought up during these debates. Analyzing debates through the lens of the MFT allows trends and patterns to be drawn amongst presidential candidates.

My primary source of data came from The Commission on Presidential Debates (CPD) on debates.org which contains another extensive library of presidential speeches dating back to 1960. The CPD contains transcripts for both presidential and vice-presidential debates.

After identifying this general source of data, I then had to scrape the data from each of the webpages as well as make the data suitable for analysis. To do this I use a number of python libraries for browser automation and web scraping. First I had to identify the home pages on which links to each debate transcript are located. After I had this initial link, I had a starting point to then scrape each link. Using Beautiful Soup, a python library that is used to pull data out of XML and HTML files, I was able to build an array of debate links. Using this method I was able to make a list of 56 links or essentially 50 transcripts. After this, I used the Selenium library to pull text from each of the 56 links. Finally, I downloaded these transcripts as .txt files and now I have a working corpus of texts to analyze. Although I didn't use all of these in my final project. They proved useful as I already had the 6 sets of presidential scores as well as the option to go into more presidents in the future.

Now that we have the data, our presidential texts, we can import these files into our Colab notebook which is an environment in which we can run data mining techniques. To score presidential rhetoric we must use our dictionaries for each of the 5 Moral Foundations. To build these dictionaries, I used a number of social science techniques. The first is an expert based dictionary building which is a practice in which individuals confer amongst each other on political rhetoric and see which words are most relevant to each pillar. Last summer, two other students and I conducted similar research into other public officials in Congress and we developed a dictionary with the help of our mentors as well. Another approach is using LLM's (Large Language Models) to develop these dictionaries. These LLM's are especially useful because we can synthesize a number of words that are related to a pillar relatively fast. For my dictionary, I used more of an expert-based approach but also took into account some words from our Large Language Models.

After applying our dictionaries, we have the ability to analyze our presidents. The first pair of Presidential candidates I took were our most recent from 2020, President Biden and President Trump. After importing all the required packages, I ran our dictionary against our text files for President Biden. From our initial numbers, President Trump had a higher authority score of 0.221932 compared to Biden's 0.121917. The other pillars would swing between the two Presidents however this initial data on authority is promising. In week 7 I will be looking at this data more in depth as well as other presidential candidates. 

After looking at all the presidential rhetoric texts I had, I realized that the best course of action was to look at the most recent incumbent Presidents and see their Moral Foundations as individual pillars amongst their overall Moral Foundations. In addition to President Biden and Trump, I looked at President Obama and Mitt Romney, and President Bush and John Kerry. Found in the eMFD_analysis_president.ipynb are the graphs for each of these Presidential candidates. The main takeaways are the emphasis in the "care" and "fairness" pillars. Amongst all successful candidates in the races, the successful candidate emphasized the pillars of "fairness" and "care" as the highest scores within their own Moral Foundations. This means that regardless of their overall totals in Moral Foundations, "fairness" and "care" were the two most important ideas amongst their own rhetoric. Another interesting fact was the heavy outlier that President Donald Trump was. In general, President Trump's rhetoric is seen as quite different and this analysis provides empirical data about this trend. His extremely high "loyalty" scores and overall high totals in overall moral language used are cause for further research into his successful speeches and unsuccessful speeches. 

In addition to looking at more of President Trump's rhetoric, future research could be looking at speeches made during major global issues and seeing how the rhetoric is adjusted to these world affairs, as well as other aspects of these debates such as looking at the sentiment of audience members after debates. 
